# C-Programs-Complete-Guide-and-Documentation
<h1>1. Getting started </h1>
<p> Before we can begin to write programs in C, it would be intresting to find out what really is C, how it came into existence and how does it compare with other programming languages. In this chapter, we would briefly outline these issues. <br> Four important aspects of any languages are - the way it stores the data, how it accomplishes input and output, and how it lets you control the sequence of execution of instructions in a program. We would discuss the first three of these building blocks in this chapter.</p>
<h2>What is C?</h2>
<p>C is a programming language developed at <b>AT & T's Bell Laboratories of USA in 1972 by Dennis Ritchie</b>. C became popular because it is simple and easy to use. An opinion that is often heard today is - "C has been already superseded by languages like C++, C# and Java, so why bother to learn C today". I seriously beg to differ with this opinion. There are several reasons for this. These are as follows. <br><br><b>(a)</b> C++, C# or Java make use of a pronciple called <b>Object Oreinted Programming</b> (OOP) to organize programs which offers many advantages. While using OOP, you need basic programming skills. So, it makes more sense to first to learn C and then migrate to C++, C# or Java. Though this two-step learning process may take more time, but are at the end of it, you will definitely find it worth the trouble.<br><br><b>(b)</b> Major parts of popular operating systems like <b>Windows, UNIX, Linux and Android are written in C</b>. Moreover, if pne is to extend the operating system to work with new devices, one needs to write device driver programs. These programs are written exclusively in C.<br><br><b>(c)</b> Common consumer devices like microwave ovens, washing machines and digital cameras are getting smarter day by day. This smartness comes from a microprocessor, an operating system and a program embedded in these devices. These programs have to run fast and work in limited amount of memory. C is the language of choice while building such operating systems and programs.<br><br><b>(d)</b> You must have seen several computer games where the user navigates some object, like say a spaceship and fires bullets at invaders. Thes essence of all such games is speed. To match this expectation of speed, the game has to react fast to the user inputs. The popular gaming frameworks (like <b>DirectX</b>) that are used for creating such games are written in C.<br><br>I hope that these are very conviencing reasons why you should adopt C as the first step in your quest of leaarning programming.</p>
<h2>Which C we are learning? </h2>
<p>The official description of the C programming language was published by <b>Brian Kernighan and Dennis Ritchie</b> in 1978. It is commonly referred as <b>K&R</b>.<br><br>In 1983, the American National Standards Institute formed a committee, X3j11, to establish a standard specification of C. The ANSI standard was complated in 1989 and ratified as ANSI X3.159-1989 "Programming Language C." This version of the language is often referred to as "ANSI C". It is sometimes also known as C89.<br><br>In 1995, the ISO published an extension to ANSI C which is often refered as ISO C. In March 2000, ANSI adopted ISO C. This standard is commonly referred to as C99. All programs in this book are based on C99 standard.</p>
<h2>Getting started with C</h2>
<p>There is a close analogy between learning English language and learing C language. This is illustrated below<br><br> Steps in learning English language:<br><b>Alphabets</b>---><b>Words</b>---><b>Sentences</b>---><b>Paragraph</b><br><br>Steps in learning C language:<br><b>Alphabets Digits Special Symbols</b>---><b>Constants Variables Keywords</b>---><b>Instructions</b>---><b>Program</b><br><br>As with English, C language too has a set of rules that one must follow while writing programs in it.</p>
<h2>Alphabets, Digits and Special Symbols</h2>
<p>Below table shows the valid alphabets, numbers and special symbols allowed in C.<br><br><b>Alphabets</b>---     A,B,C,.....,Y,Z or a,b,c,......,y,z<br><br><b>Digits</b>--- 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9<br><br><b>Special Symbols</b> -- ~`!@#%^&*()_-+=|\[]{}:;"'<>,.?/$</p>
<h2>Constants, Variables and Keywords</h2>
<p>The alphabets, digits and special symbols when properly comibined form constants, variables and keywords. A <b>constant is a entity that doesn't change</b>, whereas, a <b>variable is an entity that may change</b>. <b>A keyword is a word that carries a special meaning</b>. In programming language, constants are often called as <b>literals</b>, whereas variables are called <b>identifiers</b>. Let us now see what different types of constants and variables exist in C.</p>
<h3>Types of C constants</h3>
<p>Constants in C can be divided into two major categories: <br><br><b>(a) Primary Constants</b> - Integer, Real, Character <br><b>(b) Secondary Constants</b>- Pointer, Array, String, Structure, Union, Enum<br><br>At this stage, we would restrict our discussion to only Primary constants, namely, Integer, Real and Character constants. Following Rules have been laid down for constructing these different types of constants:</p>
<h3>Rules for Constructing Integer Constants</h3>
<p><b>(a)</b> An Integer constant must contian at least one digit.<br><b>(b)</b> It must not contian a decimal point. <br><b>(c) </b>Its value can be zero, positive or negeative. If no sign precedes an integer constant, it is assumed to be positive.<br><b>(d)</b> Commas or blanks are not allowed within an integer constant.<br><b>(e)</b> <b>The allowable range for integer constants is -2147483648 to +2147483647</b>.<br><b>Ex:</b> 426, +726, -8000 ,-7605<br><br>Truly speaking, the range  of the integer constant depends upon the compiler. For compilers like <b>Visual Studio code, GCC, it is -2147483648 to +2147483647</b>, whereas for compilers like <b>Turbo C or Turbo C++, the range is -32768 to +32768</b></p>
<h3>Rules for Constructing   Real Constants</h3>
<p>Real constants areoften called as<b> Floating Point Constants</b>. Real constants could be written in two forms-- <b>Fractional form</b> and <b>Exponential form</b>.Following rules must be observed while constructing real constants expressed in fractional form:<br><br><b>(a)</b> A real constant must must at leaast one digit.<br><b>(b)</b> It must contian a decimal point.<br><b>(c)</b> It can be zero, positive or negeative. Default sign is positive.<br><b>(d)</b> Commas or Blanks are not allowed within a real constant.<br><b>Ex:</b> +325.65,  -544.64,  2.0 , 0.1<br>The exponential form is usually used if the value of the constant is either too smallvor too large. It, however, doesn't restrict us from using exponential form for other real constants.<br>In exponential form, the real constant is represented in two parts. The part appearing before 'e' is called <b>mantissa</b>, whereas the part following 'e' is called <b>exponent</b>. Thus <b>0.000342 can be written in exponential form as 3.42e-4</b>(which in normal arthematic means 3.42 × 10^−4).<br>Following rules must be observed while constructing real constants expressed in exponential form:<br><br><b>(a)</b> The mantissa part and the exponential part should be seperated by a letter <b>e</b> or <b>E</b>.<br><b>(b)</b> The mantissa part may have a positive or negative sign. Default sign is positive.<br><b>(c)</b> The exponent must have at least one digit, which may be a positive or negative integer. Default sign is positive.<br><b>(d)</b> Range of real constants expressed in exponential form is <b>-3.4e38 to +3.4e38.</b><br><b>Ex:</b> +3.2e-5,    4.1e23,   -8.5E-6    , -3.2E-5</p>
<h3>Rules for Constructing Character Constants</h3>
<p><br><b>(a)</b> A character constant is a single alphabet, digit or special symbol enclosed within single inverted commas.<br><b>(b)</b> Both the single inverted commas should point to the left. <b>For example</b>, <b>'a'</b> is a valid characater constant, whereas <b>`a'</b> is not.<br><b>Ex: </b> 'A' , 'I' , 'a'  ,'4'  ,'+'</p>
